July and August and early September, it makes you
begin to think about a college education that's
going to be a better route. I was not adverse to hard
work later on. I deeply appreciated it because I
knew how to work hard in the classroom and later in
career. Describe, I have not had such a
conversation with anyone about med school
before. Describe how you and the other members of
that entering class, how you were gathered, how
did the year begin, how did y'all get into classes
and so forth. Well it was interesting because at
this same time A&M was undergoing the transition
from non-compulsory or two non-compulsory
corps, and the admission of women. And the very
first young woman to ever go through veterinary
college was in my class. There were 63 young men and
one young lady. And we did have orientation for it.
We had a full day orientation prior to the start of
classes. And of course, when you're here on campus
and you're talking to all the veterinary
students, you know a whole lot. The word of mouth on
campus is probably the best communication link
there is. So we knew what to expect. We knew how hard
it was going to be. We knew what the long hours would
be. And we also just assembled as a group. And with
only 64 people, you get to know each other very
quickly. And I had had classes with so many of the
others in my first class. You also had friends that
you left behind that didn't get in. They didn't
have the grades to get in. Many of them were going to
go another year and to keep trying to get in. And we
knew what we were in for to some degree. But we were
also in another transition. We were in the
transition to the three year, year round, nine
trimesters of work, which is actually one more
comparable to semester credit hours than the four
years at two. And we knew we were in for long hours
the entire year. We only got a small time off of
about two weeks in August, so it was grueling. We
had 39 contact hours in class my first semester,
and on Fridays we had nine hours of class. We
started every Friday morning for 15 weeks with a
retroactive exam in microbiology. and anatomy
lab from 1 to 5 on Friday afternoons. And one Friday
afternoon, about three quarters through the
semester, one of our classmates threw up his arms.
He said, that's it. I can't take anymore. I'm gone.
And we never saw him again. Oh, really? Back to that
orientation. I've heard that Al Price used to give
an impressive... Oh, clearly he was an impressive
individual. And I will tell you, I had always had an
interest since a small boy of being a scientist, of
being in science, of accomplishing something
that would be known, of achieving some things big.
And when Al Price gave the orientation and often
would come speak to us as a class, I thought, I want
to be a dean. I want to be in a leadership role in
veterinary medicine. I'm not sure at that point I
had the vision of then going higher up in upper
administration. I later got that vision. But he
was so professional and made such an impact, I
believe, on all 64 of us about the trust that had
been given to us. about the select few out of the
600, here we were the 64, that we had a real
obligation and responsibility to not only
ourselves and our parents, but to this
institution. And you could not help but want to
achieve because of how he laid things out and just
the overall role model professionalism that was
before us. Now, I've heard that he gave an emphasis
on pronouncing the name of the profession
correctly. No question. It was veterinary
medicine, and it was a veterinarian, and that was
very clear. And you need to learn to spell it
correctly. And back then, most of the times, even
in the sciences, if you misspelled a word, it may be
counted off. And boy, those medical terms were not
easy. Now, his nickname was Slick Al. Slick Al.
What did that mean? It was given before we got
there, and I think, I never heard a lot of people
discuss it, but I think that he was just so smooth in
how he handled himself. That it wasn't that he was a
slick operator putting one over? No, absolutely
not. And you knew he was He was tough, he was
straight, he was forward, and he was professional
in every way. And I think it was a compliment, quite
frankly, because he operated everything so
smoothly and in such incredible order. That first
year, did you all take all the same courses?
Absolutely. We all had the same courses. But we had
a little bit different schedules because we were
broken into two sections of 32. What were the, as
you now look back, what were the toughest? Oh,
that's easy. The toughest courses were anatomy
and physiology. Who taught those? Big John
Miloff. And we called him Big John. He was about
6'4",
just a, tremendous teacher. And when he walked in,
he commanded respect. And I'll never forget one
day, one of my classmates asked him in histology
lab, which we got only three hours of credit. He
said, Dr. John, why is this just a three hour credit
course? Because we were putting in many more
hours. He said, well, son, We didn't want you
taking too damn many hours this semester. That was
his answer, and it was dropped then. And the other
was clearly physiology. Who taught that? This one
had a nickname. Great teacher, he's now deceased.
His name was Dick Davis. Brilliant man. Could have
taught in any medical school in the world. And he
would get so excited in labs that he would almost
froth at the mouth. And he was nicknamed Mad Dog
Davis. And I'm sure that came because of his
excitement. And he would just get so excited. And
he had another professor with him that helped in
labs. His last name was Sabonowicz. And that may be
Polish, I think. But it was some Eastern European
country. And the two of them would just, I mean, get
into a comic situation over something happening
with a dog on the physiograph in a physiology
laboratory doing an experiment. We were just
amazed at it, but boy, they were good. And was there
any course that was fun? What was the most
enjoyable of those? I loved the sciences. And I
really enjoyed physiology. To me, it was fun
because you would, for the first time, you get your
hands on some animals, you could see the
physiologic responses and systems of the body and
the intricacies of how they worked. To me, it was
the most fun course. It was a difficult course.
Anatomy was something you knew you had to learn,
but it wasn't very exciting. And I think the people
who taught it would probably tell you that. I
enjoyed biochemistry
because I had another course of it in the first
year. It was a tough course, but it was
fundamental. The first year, both semesters or
all three trimesters as I had it, you were really
laying the foundations and the basics for what you
really, in your mind, thought you were there to do.
And you had to keep reminding yourself that I've
got to accomplish this before I get to do the things
of hands-on experiences. Now, over on the campus,
part of the campus where I was working then, we
posted grades publicly. Oh, absolutely. Is that
right? Oh, yeah, we did too. All right, at the end of
that first semester in general, what was the
result for your class? I don't think we lost anyone
except the young man that was just so burned out he
left. I don't recall losing anyone the whole first
year because they clearly had the aptitude to be
able to handle it because when you take 64 out of
600, you've got people there who have the
intellect to handle it. And I don't recall
anybody, but it was always interesting to go look
because your grades were posted and your name was
up there. Do you have any generalization about
what kind of GPA, if we went to the bottom of the 64,
the GPA was what or higher probably? I seriously
would doubt anyone was in that class that was lower
than 33. I would not think so. Now what was
interesting was that all the high achievers were
now put in there together and being challenged by
professors that wanted to see how much they could
challenge them. And for some of the people in the
class to make their first C or D just absolutely
crushed them. generalize about the makeup of the
class. Where were they from geographically? All
of them were from all parts of the state except for
nine that were contract students from the state of
Louisiana. And they were all different. And many
of them were truly Cajun. And they taught Cajun.
They brought their chicory coffee with them in the
morning. But they were great to have with us. And
they mixed in with us. It was interesting because
the student composition of that 64 was made up of a
lot of us that were very young, and a lot of students
who already had a degree, a lot who had been out and
worked for a number of years. We had people in my
class, I'm sure, who were in their 30s, and yet here
I was I got my undergraduate and my doctorate at the
age of 23. So we were young, a lot of us. So there was a
big mixture, and many of them were married with
children. There were many of us that were looking
for a wife. And so where were the Texans from? All
over the state. I mean, it was really varied. One of
my classmates my first year in veterinary college
was from Sterling City. And one of my dear friends
that housed next door was from Miami, Texas, way up
in the panhandle. Were most of them small town,
rural? I would say probably a higher percentage
then than you would find today, yeah. Probably 60,
65%.
But that was also true of the whole student body,
too. What was life like for that one young lady? You
know that was interesting because if you look back
at the 1963 annual you will see a full-page picture
of me holding the door open for her walking into the
small animal clinic and I think it signified and
she understood that she had opened a new door. But
she was a unique personality that enjoyed that
position. And we treated her with great respect.
She took a lot of joking, but it was never done in a
way that she shouldn't be here. It was done in a way
of, hey, you know, you're the first to do this.
We're glad to have you. And she had the personality
to just mix in like one of everyone else. What was
her name? Her name was Sonia Oliphant.
O-L-I-P-H-A-N-T? That's correct. Do you
remember from where or what school? I'm not
totally sure. I think it may have been Texas Tech.
And I know that she later married a student that was
in a class or two behind us and was in practice in the
Lubbock area. So she did graduate. She graduated
with us right on time. And so in the four years, or
three years, she, as far as you were aware,
was not treated inappropriately? Never, that I
was aware of. I mean, she was included in
everything. It was kind of like we were proud to
have her. I really believe that that was part of the
mentality of our class, that women were coming to
A&M, she was the first in our veterinary class, and
we were glad to have her. She was a good sport.
personality and just mixed in with all of them. Now
how did you all create a kind of community of
friends? Did you do anything socially in your
class? Oh yeah, and the veterinary college was
well organized. The student body was well
organized. We had what we call the student chapter
of the American Veterinary Medical Association.
And secondly, each class had its class officers.
We had certain kinds of class functions and
events. We had a mixer and a big barbecue at the
start of our very first trimester. And that was for
the whole student body. We would have class
meetings. Where would it be held? It was held out at
Old Fort Shiloh once. It was held over near Snook
once. It was held over where current Texas Hall of
Fame is and I'm trying to recall but I believe the
second year class was responsible for putting it
on for the first so that when you got to be the next
year you put it on for that class. To whom did you
turn for advice if you needed? You were assigned an
advisor, an academic advisor who was a full tenure
track faculty member in the college of veterinary
medicine and if you had any kind of problem or need
you went to that individual as well as with only 64
students the dean's office uh dr mcmurray usually
was available can you give an example of any advice
you've sought and received i don't recall ever
going things went smoothly and I don't recall ever
having to go because we knew what our schedule was
going to be. It was sent to us then. We didn't go
negotiate it. Did you have a car by then? That first
year in Vetchco? Yes. I finally had a car. And you
lived where? I lived still in
Law Hall my first year. I lived off campus my second
over on College Main. And then my third year, I
lived out at Welburton in an old house with three
other veterinary students. I was the cook and they
became the cleanup crew. And we could save
tremendous amounts of money. Because we'd go to
the grocery store and buy our food and I'd cook.
That first year of vet school, how often did you go
home? Not much. I probably didn't go home, but
maybe once or twice. You're saying maybe
Thanksgiving and Christmas? Yeah, and I recall, I
know I went home the weekend that Kennedy was
assassinated because I got back to the room. I had
the radio on. Maybe they had announced it.
over the loudspeakers at veterinary school. But I
remember getting in my car and driving home,
listening to the radio, and almost having trouble
driving, trying to stay concentrated to the
happenings that were occurring. And then that
shooting of Jack Ruby in the police station
occurred while some of us were in church Sunday
morning. And I was at home. And I remember seeing
that on television at home. before I drove back.
This doesn't have anything to do with vet school,
but does the real world. What was the reaction of
you and your buddies to those events? I think
everyone was just in a state of disbelief and
almost shocked that that could occur,
particularly that it could occur in Texas.
Because I want to tell you, there is a Texas pride
that is inborn and it is there forever. See, I was
embarrassed. Absolutely. And I think we all felt
that way. I had a 12-to-1 class, and I was to meet
Garland Bayless, and we were going to the MSC. And I
came in, and he was glued to this radio. And I said,
come on, we've got to beat the line. He said, listen
to the radio. I said, we can hear the darn radio. He
said, listen. And I heard Cronkite say, I've just
been given the notice. President Kennedy is dead.
And my, my, my, I was stunned.
The route, let's go back to a typical day while you,
that first year of vet school. You got up, did you
eat breakfast in the dining hall? I usually ate
sabisa. And then went to climb. Immediately went
across the tracks. At that time we were the only
academic program across the tracks. And you,
where'd you eat lunch? Normally, we would come to
Northgate or maybe go to Savisa the first year.
Later on, when we lived off campus or when I lived
out at Welbert, we actually made our lunches and
ate under the trees around the veterinary
college. Normally you were over there in the
afternoons until about what time? Oh, at least 5
o'clock. Did you go back at night much? Not a whole
lot.
Rarely did I go back. Every once in a while I'd have
to go to the library, and we did have the veterinary
medical library, which is now the medical
sciences library. and if I had to do some research
or something. I never could study very well in the
library. My personal best study was done to get in
my room, close the doors, get it quiet, and believe
it or not, I usually studied laying on the bed,
sometimes laying on the bed with my notes in the
floor and looking off on them. And did you have any
Saturday classes over there? No, we had no
Saturday classes until my senior year. What did
you all do on Saturdays? Well Friday night was an
off night. We rested, re-relaxed, we were dead.
Saturday a lot of times we'd sleep in a little
later. Of course we'd be involved with campus
activities. And then a lot of times on Saturday
nights we'd be back studying because we had so many
major things happening. It was an accelerated
program on the three year transition. Did many vet
students party? on a Saturday night? Some did, but
not like probably a lot of other students. As far as
you know, if they were going to party, where did
they go? Oh, gosh, what was the name of that place
out on Highway 60? Not Uncle Ed's. No. Went to
Whiskey Bridge. No, it was someplace out there. I
never did go out there, but I can remember going out
there. I remember talking about Whiskey Bridge.
There was someplace out there that a lot of them
went. Lakeview Club, I think, was open, so a few of
them would go out there. How many of your
classmates were smokers? That's an interesting
question. There were probably, out of 64, I would
say we probably had 15 maybe. Oh, that's all? Maybe
20. But I tell you what, when they took histology
and Dr. John Miliff showed them the inside of a
smoker's lung, there were more of them that quit
after that, after seeing what it would do. And he
also showed them the lung tissue of a person with
emphysema. And that spoke volumes because you
were looking through a microscope at what it would
do to the body and to the lungs. Did you and your
buddies even know the terminology of drugs? No,
you never heard of it. The only drug everyone back
then was aware of was alcohol. One thing we did on
Friday nights, or Saturday nights, the old Circle
drive-in was still there, so we'd go to a drive-in
movie. Every once in a while we'd drive over to Sam
Houston. Now you met this special young lady your
first year of vet school? My second. Second year.
And you began to see her more often. Absolutely.
When did it get serious? It wasn't long. I met her in
October.
I went to Austin for the UT A&M game. in November on
Thanksgiving and met her parents that short
period and then in December I actually went she was
from Dilley down in South Texas and I actually went
down where she lived and visited their family then
and then the very next year she graduated the
University of Texas in May and uh in Corpus and of
course we were already real serious then and that
was not working out because Corpus was so far away
and there was no way and I was in my senior year by
then there was no way I could go see her and of course
she couldn't come up here every weekend And her
lights went out on her car returning to Corpus one
weekend after being up here for a football game. So
in October of my senior year, before I graduated
the next August, we decided that we were going to
get married. And we just prayed that she could find
a teaching job at Bryan College Station. And her
mother and dad came in October for a football game
here. And by that time, she had another brother
here. And down at the old Bryan Holiday Inn, which
is now a private dorm, I asked everybody to leave
the room, and I talked to her dad and asked
permission to marry her. I had already given her
the ring earlier that weekend. And he gave us our
blessings, and we got married in December. That
same year? Of your fourth year in vet school. Third
year in vet school. Third year in vet school. It was
December 26, 1965. All right, and so then she is
here teaching? She started teaching here in
January at Bowie, Bowie Elementary in downtown
Bryant. So your fourth year, I mean, you're, oh,
no. My senior year, third year. Yeah, yeah, you're
finishing. Right. At that point, who had
influenced, which individual or what course had
influenced you most in the DVM program? That's
easy. I was influenced by just the excitement the
challenge, the glamour of small animal surgery.
Because what was so exciting was that we were doing
then and implementing and bringing the surgical
procedures that were being done in the human to the
small animal, and people were willing to pay for
it. I'm talking about cataract surgery, I'm
talking about all kinds of orthopedic surgery,
and my heart and my interest was in spinal and
neurosurgery. And there was a professor named Don
Piermatti who was probably one of the most
professional
individuals I was ever around. and his influence
of scrubbing in with him. And two things happened
that year. One is that Rudder's dog, Old Ranger,
who was the campus mascot. And when I was an
undergrad here, we would take him and put him in the
seat in a classroom with us. And he always was over
there. We'd wait for him to cross the street. We'd
take him into Sabisa. He got a kidney stone. And I
got to scrub in on that procedure. And then later in
the year, Reveille had some surgical problem that
I don't recall specifically what it was now. I also
got to scrub in on that. And I just have always been a
person driven by challenge. That's why I could
never have been in a routine private practice. It
would have bored me to death. And when I could see
the challenge of what they were doing, the
pioneering that could be done in it, the research
that could be done in it, I was turned on to that. And
I immediately, prior to even my senior year, had
begun to think about, I want to go into teaching and
research. And ultimately, I want to get into a
leadership role of what's happening in this kind
of an educational field. So I had to start
preparing myself for it. So I began to look And
after graduation, where could I go and get
post-doctoral training in the area where I wanted
to pursue? Who did you turn to as a counselor for
those serious thoughts? Well, Dr. Pierre Maddy
was one, and Dr. Lynn Huroff was another in small
animal. And I also went to Dr. Price and talked to
him about it. And of course, it was clear that if I
wanted to pursue an academic career, that I had to
go on and do post-doctoral work. So they were very
good in giving me contacts of other veterinary
medical colleges around the nation. I was given an
offer to come be a post-doctoral student both at
Colorado State University and at Auburn
University. I would much prefer probably to have
gone to Colorado State and lived in the mountains.
But Auburn had the premier neurosurgeon in
America. And I'll never forget, they actually
flew me up there to have an interview. And it was
only my second time ever in an airplane. And they
offered me the job while I was there. which was a
post-doctoral research fellow in the Scott
Ritchie program. And my salary would be $7,580 a
year.
And what is amazing is that I graduated from A&E.
Because we were on.
And we loaded.